{\rtf1\ansi\deff3\adeflang1025
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman\fprq2\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Serif{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f4\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Liberation Sans{\*\falt Arial};}{\f5\fnil\fprq0\fcharset0 Arial{\*\falt sans-serif};}{\f6\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Droid Sans Fallback;}{\f7\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Noto Sans Devanagari;}{\f8\fswiss\fprq0\fcharset128 Noto Sans Devanagari;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;\red108\green108\blue108;\red0\green179\blue172;}
{\stylesheet{\s0\snext0\widctlpar\hyphpar0\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\hich\af3\fs24\lang1033 Normal;}
{\s3\sbasedon17\snext18\ilvl2\outlinelevel2\sb140\sa120\keepn\b\dbch\af6\dbch\af7\afs28\ab\loch\f3\fs28 Heading 3;}
{\*\cs15\snext15\i\ai Emphasis;}
{\*\cs16\snext16\cf9\ul\ulc0\langfe255\alang255\lang255 Internet Link;}
{\s17\sbasedon0\snext18\sb240\sa120\keepn\dbch\af6\dbch\af7\afs28\loch\f4\fs28 Heading;}
{\s18\sbasedon0\snext18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140 Text Body;}
{\s19\sbasedon18\snext19\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\dbch\af8 List;}
{\s20\sbasedon0\snext20\sb120\sa120\noline\i\dbch\af8\afs24\ai\fs24 Caption;}
{\s21\sbasedon0\snext21\noline\dbch\af8 Index;}
}{\*\generator LibreOffice/6.1.5.2$Linux_X86_64 LibreOffice_project/10$Build-2}{\info{\creatim\yr2019\mo5\dy1\hr23\min0}{\revtim\yr2019\mo5\dy1\hr23\min8}{\printim\yr0\mo0\dy0\hr0\min0}}{\*\userprops}\deftab709
\viewscale100
{\*\pgdsctbl
{\pgdsc0\pgdscuse451\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\pgdscnxt0 Default Style;}}
\formshade\paperh15840\paperw12240\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134\sectd\sbknone\sectunlocked1\pgndec\pgwsxn12240\pghsxn15840\marglsxn1134\margrsxn1134\margtsxn1134\margbsxn1134\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstcont\ftnnar\aenddoc\aftnrstcont\aftnstart1\aftnnrlc
{\*\ftnsep\chftnsep}\pgndec\pard\plain \s18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\widctlpar\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\sb0\sa0{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
Steganography is the technique of hiding secret data within an ordinary, non-secret, file or message in order to avoid detection; the secret data is then extracted at its destination. The use of steganography can be combined with encryption as an extra step for hiding or protecting data. The word }{\cs15\i\ai\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
steganography }{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
is derived from the Greek words }{\cs15\i\ai\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
steganos}{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
(meaning }{\cs15\i\ai\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
hidden }{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
or c}{\cs15\i\ai\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
overed}{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
) and the Greek root }{\cs15\i\ai\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
graph}{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
 (meaning }{\cs15\i\ai\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
to write}{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
).}
\par \pard\plain \s18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\widctlpar\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
Steganography can be used to conceal almost any type of digital content, including text, image, video or audio content; the data to be hidden can be hidden inside almost any other type of digital content. The content to be concealed through steganography -- called }{\cs15\i\ai\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
hidden text}{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
 -- is often encrypted before being incorporated into the innocuous-seeming }{\cs15\i\ai\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
cover text}{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
 file or data stream. If not encrypted, the hidden text is commonly processed in some way in order to increase the difficulty of detecting the secret content.}
\par \pard\plain \s18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\widctlpar\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
Steganography is practiced by those wishing to convey a secret message or code. While there are many legitimate uses for steganography, malware developers have also been found to use steganography to obscure the transmission of malicious code.}
\par \pard\plain \s18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\widctlpar\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\scaps0\caps0\cf17\expnd0\expndtw0\i0\b0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27\loch\f5\hich\af5
Forms of steganography have been used for centuries and include almost any technique for hiding a secret message in an otherwise harmless container. For example, using invisible ink to hide secret messages in otherwise inoffensive messages; hiding documents recorded on microdot -- which can be as small as 1 millimeter in diameter -- on or inside legitimate-seeming correspondence; and even by using multiplayer gaming environments to share information.}
\par \pard\plain \s3\ilvl2\outlinelevel2\sb140\sa120\keepn\b\dbch\af6\dbch\af7\afs28\ab\loch\f3\fs28\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\sb0\sa0{\scaps0\caps0\i0\b\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs30\loch\f5\hich\af5
Steganography techniques}
\par \pard\plain \s18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\cf17\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
In modern digital steganography, data is first encrypted or obfuscated in some other way and then inserted, using a special }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/algorithm" }{\fldrslt {\cf9\ul\ulc0\langfe255\alang255\lang255\cf18\ul\ulc0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
algorithm}{}}}\cf17\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
, into data that is part of a particular file format such as a }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/JPEG-Joint-Photographic-Experts-Group" }{\fldrslt {\cf9\ul\ulc0\langfe255\alang255\lang255\cf18\ul\ulc0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
JPEG}{}}}\cf17\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
 image, audio or video file. The secret message can be embedded into ordinary data files in many different ways. One technique is to hide data in bits that represent the same color }{{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/pixel" }{\fldrslt {\cf9\ul\ulc0\langfe255\alang255\lang255\cf18\ul\ulc0\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
pixels}{}}}\cf17\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
 repeated in a row in an image file. By applying the encrypted data to this redundant data in some inconspicuous way, the result will be an image file that appears identical to the original image but that has "noise" patterns of regular, unencrypted data.}
\par \pard\plain \s18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\cf17\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
The practice of adding a watermark -- a trademark or other identifying data hidden in multimedia or other content files -- is one common use of steganography. Watermarking is a technique often used by online publishers to identify the source of media files that have been found being shared without permission.}
\par \pard\plain \s18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\cf17\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
While there are many different uses of steganography, including embedding sensitive information into file types, one of the most common techniques is to embed a text file into an image file. When this is done, anyone viewing the image f{\v UEsDBAoACwAAAIm5oU6/O3NPLQAAACEAAAAIABwAZmxhZy50eHRVVAkAA6L9yVxu/clcdXgLAAEE6AMAAAToAwAA25gLXb6+Fm4zRgM4dOUY7QopRVhoxPkLFe30io5veiANEQfaEfGxcCImBrT/UEsHCL87c08tAAAAIQAAAFBLAQIeAwoACwAAAIm5oU6/O3NPLQAAACEAAAAIABgAAAAAAAEAAACkgQAAAABmbGFnLnR4dFVUBQADov3JXHV4CwABBOgDAAAE6AMAAFBLBQYAAAAAAQABAE4AAAB/AAAAAAA=}ile should not be able to see a difference between the original image file and the encrypted file; this is accomplished by storing the message with less significant bites in the data file. This process can be completed manually or with the use of a steganography tool.}
\par \pard\plain \s3\ilvl2\outlinelevel2\sb140\sa120\keepn\b\dbch\af6\dbch\af7\afs28\ab\loch\f3\fs28\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\sb0\sa0{\scaps0\caps0\i0\b\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs30\loch\f5\hich\af5
Advantages over cryptography}
\par \pard\plain \s18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\cf17\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
Steganography is distinct from cryptography, but using both together can help improve the security of the protected information and prevent detection of the secret communication. If steganographically-hidden data is also encrypted, the data may still be safe from detection -- though the channel will no longer be safe from detection. There are advantages to using steganography combined with encryption over encryption-only communication.}
\par \pard\plain \s18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\cf17\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
The primary advantage of using steganography to hide data over encryption is that it helps obscure the fact that there is sensitive data hidden in the file or other content carrying the hidden text. Whereas an encrypted file, message or network packet payload is clearly marked and identifiable as such, using steganographic techniques helps to obscure the presence of the secure channel.}
\par \pard\plain \s3\ilvl2\outlinelevel2\sb140\sa120\keepn\b\dbch\af6\dbch\af7\afs28\ab\loch\f3\fs28\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0\sb0\sa0{\scaps0\caps0\i0\b\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs30\loch\f5\hich\af5
Steganography software}
\par \pard\plain \s18\sl276\slmult1\sb0\sa140\li0\ri0\lin0\rin0\fi0{\cf17\rtlch \ltrch\loch\fs27
Steganography software is used to perform a variety of functions in order to hide data, including encoding the data in order to prepare it to be hidden inside another file, keeping track of which bits of the cover text file contain hidden data, encrypting the data to be hidden and extracting hidden data by its intended recipient.}
\par \pard\plain \s0\widctlpar\hyphpar0\cf0\kerning1\dbch\af6\langfe2052\dbch\af7\afs24\alang1081\loch\f3\hich\af3\fs24\lang1033{\rtlch \ltrch\loch
\u1050\'3f\u1089\'3f\u1090\'3f\u1072\'3f\u1090\'3f\u1080\'3f, \u1087\'3f\u1072\'3f\u1088\'3f\u1086\'3f\u1083\'3f\u1100\'3f-\u1090\'3f\u1086\'3f 3 \u1094\'3f\u1080\'3f\u1092\'3f\u1088\'3f\u1099\'3f}
\par }